docs/users_guide/8.4.1-notes.rst, before:

.. _release-8-4-1:

Release notes for version 8.4.1
===============================

The significant changes to the various parts of the compiler are listed in the
following sections. There have also been numerous bug fixes and performance
improvements over the 8.2.1 release.


Highlights
----------

The highlights, since the 8.2.1 release, are:

-  Many, many bug fixes.

Full details
------------

Language
~~~~~~~~

Compiler
~~~~~~~~

- The ``configure`` script now no longer accepts ``--with-TOOL`` flags (e.g.
  ``--with-nm``, ``--with-ld``, etc.). Instead, these are taken from environment
  variables, as is typical in ``autoconf`` scripts. For instance,
  ``./configure --with-nm=/usr/local/bin/nm`` turns into
  ``./configure NM=/usr/local/bin/nm``.

- Derived ``Functor``, ``Foldable``, and ``Traversable`` instances are now
  optimized when their last type parameters have phantom roles.
  Specifically, ::

    fmap _ = coerce
    traverse _ x = pure (coerce x)
    foldMap _ _ = mempty

  These definitions of ``foldMap`` and ``traverse`` are lazier than the ones we
  would otherwise derive, as they may produce results without inspecting their
  arguments at all.

  See also :ref:`deriving-functor`, :ref:`deriving-foldable`, and
  :ref:`deriving-traversable`.

- Derived ``Functor``, ``Foldable``, ``Traversable``, ``Generic``, and
  ``Generic1`` instances now have better, and generally better-documented,
  behaviors for types with no constructors. In particular, ::

      fmap _ x = case x of
      foldMap _ _ = mempty
      traverse _ x = pure (case x of)
      to x = case x of
      to1 x = case x of
      from x = case x of
      from1 x = case x of

  The new behavior generally leads to more useful error messages than the
  old did, and lazier semantics for ``foldMap`` and ``traverse``.

- Derived ``Foldable`` instances now derive custom definitions for ``null``
  instead of using the default one. This leads to asymptotically better
  performance for recursive types not shaped like cons-lists, and allows ``null``
  to terminate for more (but not all) infinitely large structures.

- Derived instances for types with no constructors now have appropriate
  arities: they take all their arguments before producing errors. This may not
  be terribly important in practice, but it seems like the right thing to do.
  Previously, we generated ::

      (==) = error ...

Now we generate ::

      _ == _ = error ...

- `-fsplit-sections` is now supported on x86_64 Windows and is on by default.
  See :ghc-ticket:`12913`.

- Configure on Windows now supports ``--enable-distro-toolchain`` which can be
  used to build a GHC using compilers on your ``PATH`` instead of using the
  bundled bindist. See :ghc-ticket:`13792`

- The optional ``instance`` keyword is now usable in type family instance
  declarations. See :ghc-ticket:`13747`

- Lots of other bugs. See `Trac <https://ghc.haskell.org/trac/ghc/query?status=closed&milestone=8.4.1&col=id&col=summary&col=status&col=type&col=priority&col=milestone&col=component&order=priority>`_
  for a complete list.

Runtime system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Function ``hs_add_root()`` was removed. It was a no-op since GHC-7.2.1
  where module initialisation stopped requiring a call to ``hs_add_root()``.

- Proper import library support added to GHC which can handle all of the libraries produced
  by dlltool. The limitation of them needing to be named with the suffix .dll.a is also removed.
  See :ghc-ticket:`13606`, :ghc-ticket:`12499`, :ghc-ticket:`12498`

- The GHCi runtime linker on Windows now supports the `big-obj` file format.

Template Haskell
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ghc`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- hsSyn Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) is now extensible via the mechanism described in `Trees that Grow <http://www.jucs.org/jucs_23_1/trees_that_grow/jucs_23_01_0042_0062_najd.pdf>`_

  The main change for users of the GHC API is that the AST is no longer indexed
  by the type used as the identifier, but by a specific index type, ::

      type GhcPs   = GhcPass 'Parsed      -- Old 'RdrName' type param
      type GhcRn   = GhcPass 'Renamed     -- Old 'Name' type param
      type GhcTc   = GhcPass 'Typechecked -- Old 'Id' type para,
      type GhcTcId = GhcTc                -- Old 'TcId' type param

  The simplest way to support the current GHC as well as earlier ones is to define ::

      #if MIN_VERSION_ghc(8,3,0)
      type ParseI     = GhcPs
      type RenameI    = GhcRn
      type TypecheckI = GhcTc
      #else
      type ParseI     = RdrName
      type RenameI    = Name
      type TypecheckI = Var
      #endif

  and then replace all hardcoded index types accordingly. For polymorphic types,
  the constraint ::

      #if MIN_VERSION_ghc(8,3,0)
      -- |bundle up the constraints required for a trees that grow pass
      type IsPass pass = (DataId pass, OutputableBndrId pass, SourceTextX pass)
      else
      type IsPass pass = (DataId pass, OutputableBndrId pass)
      #endif

  can be used.

Commit message:

Fix #12369 by being more flexible with data insts
Previously, a data family's kind had to end in `Type`,
and data instances had to list all the type patterns for the
family. However, both of these restrictions were unnecessary:

- A data family's kind can usefully end in a kind variable `k`.
  See examples on #12369.

- A data instance need not list all patterns, much like how a
  GADT-style data declaration need not list all type parameters,
  when a kind signature is in place. This is useful, for example,
  here:

    data family Sing (a :: k)
    data instance Sing :: Bool -> Type where ...

This patch also improved a few error messages, as some error
plumbing had to be moved around.

See new Note [Arity of data families] in FamInstEnv for more
info.

test case: indexed-types/should_compile/T12369

docs/users_guide/8.4.1-notes.rst, after:

.. _release-8-4-1:

Release notes for version 8.4.1
===============================

The significant changes to the various parts of the compiler are listed in the
following sections. There have also been numerous bug fixes and performance
improvements over the 8.2.1 release.


Highlights
----------

The highlights, since the 8.2.1 release, are:

-  Many, many bug fixes.

Full details
------------

Language
~~~~~~~~

- Data families have been generalised a bit: a data family declaration can now
  end with a kind variable ``k`` instead of ``Type``. Additionally, data/newtype
  instance no longer need to list all the patterns of the family if they don't
  wish to; this is quite like how regular datatypes with a kind signature can omit
  some type variables.

Compiler
~~~~~~~~

- The ``configure`` script now no longer accepts ``--with-TOOL`` flags (e.g.
  ``--with-nm``, ``--with-ld``, etc.). Instead, these are taken from environment
  variables, as is typical in ``autoconf`` scripts. For instance,
  ``./configure --with-nm=/usr/local/bin/nm`` turns into
  ``./configure NM=/usr/local/bin/nm``.

- Derived ``Functor``, ``Foldable``, and ``Traversable`` instances are now
  optimized when their last type parameters have phantom roles.
  Specifically, ::

    fmap _ = coerce
    traverse _ x = pure (coerce x)
    foldMap _ _ = mempty

  These definitions of ``foldMap`` and ``traverse`` are lazier than the ones we
  would otherwise derive, as they may produce results without inspecting their
  arguments at all.

  See also :ref:`deriving-functor`, :ref:`deriving-foldable`, and
  :ref:`deriving-traversable`.

- Derived ``Functor``, ``Foldable``, ``Traversable``, ``Generic``, and
  ``Generic1`` instances now have better, and generally better-documented,
  behaviors for types with no constructors. In particular, ::

      fmap _ x = case x of
      foldMap _ _ = mempty
      traverse _ x = pure (case x of)
      to x = case x of
      to1 x = case x of
      from x = case x of
      from1 x = case x of

  The new behavior generally leads to more useful error messages than the
  old did, and lazier semantics for ``foldMap`` and ``traverse``.

- Derived ``Foldable`` instances now derive custom definitions for ``null``
  instead of using the default one. This leads to asymptotically better
  performance for recursive types not shaped like cons-lists, and allows ``null``
  to terminate for more (but not all) infinitely large structures.

- Derived instances for types with no constructors now have appropriate
  arities: they take all their arguments before producing errors. This may not
  be terribly important in practice, but it seems like the right thing to do.
  Previously, we generated ::

      (==) = error ...

Now we generate ::

      _ == _ = error ...

- `-fsplit-sections` is now supported on x86_64 Windows and is on by default.
  See :ghc-ticket:`12913`.

- Configure on Windows now supports ``--enable-distro-toolchain`` which can be
  used to build a GHC using compilers on your ``PATH`` instead of using the
  bundled bindist. See :ghc-ticket:`13792`

- The optional ``instance`` keyword is now usable in type family instance
  declarations. See :ghc-ticket:`13747`

- Lots of other bugs. See `Trac <https://ghc.haskell.org/trac/ghc/query?status=closed&milestone=8.4.1&col=id&col=summary&col=status&col=type&col=priority&col=milestone&col=component&order=priority>`_
  for a complete list.

Runtime system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Function ``hs_add_root()`` was removed. It was a no-op since GHC-7.2.1
  where module initialisation stopped requiring a call to ``hs_add_root()``.

- Proper import library support added to GHC which can handle all of the libraries produced
  by dlltool. The limitation of them needing to be named with the suffix .dll.a is also removed.
  See :ghc-ticket:`13606`, :ghc-ticket:`12499`, :ghc-ticket:`12498`

- The GHCi runtime linker on Windows now supports the `big-obj` file format.

Template Haskell
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ghc`` library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- hsSyn Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) is now extensible via the mechanism described in `Trees that Grow <http://www.jucs.org/jucs_23_1/trees_that_grow/jucs_23_01_0042_0062_najd.pdf>`_

  The main change for users of the GHC API is that the AST is no longer indexed
  by the type used as the identifier, but by a specific index type, ::

      type GhcPs   = GhcPass 'Parsed      -- Old 'RdrName' type param
      type GhcRn   = GhcPass 'Renamed     -- Old 'Name' type param
      type GhcTc   = GhcPass 'Typechecked -- Old 'Id' type para,
      type GhcTcId = GhcTc                -- Old 'TcId' type param

  The simplest way to support the current GHC as well as earlier ones is to define ::

      #if MIN_VERSION_ghc(8,3,0)
      type ParseI     = GhcPs
      type RenameI    = GhcRn
      type TypecheckI = GhcTc
      #else
      type ParseI     = RdrName
      type RenameI    = Name
      type TypecheckI = Var
      #endif

  and then replace all hardcoded index types accordingly. For polymorphic types,
  the constraint ::

      #if MIN_VERSION_ghc(8,3,0)
      -- |bundle up the constraints required for a trees that grow pass
      type IsPass pass = (DataId pass, OutputableBndrId pass, SourceTextX pass)
      else
      type IsPass pass = (DataId pass, OutputableBndrId pass)
      #endif

  can be used.
